Upgrade doc changes (#772)
digital-asset/docs.daml.com: docs/2.10.0/docs/upgrade/smart-contract-upgrades.rst

.. _smart-contract-upgrades:

Smart Contract Upgrade
######################

.. .. toctree::
   :hidden:

Theory of Operation
===================

What is Smart Contract Upgrade (SCU)?
-------------------------------------

Smart Contract Upgrade (SCU) allows Daml models (packages in DAR files) to be
updated on Canton transparently, provided some guidelines in making the
changes are followed. For example, you can fix an application bug by uploading

> the DAR of the fixed package. This feature requires the minimum versions of LF
> 1.16 and Canton Protocol versions 6.   This section provides an overview of
> the SCU feature.  The section :ref:`The Smart Contract Upgrade Model in Depth
> <upgrade-model-reference>` is a concise, technical description of the feature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the DAR of the fixed package. This feature requires the minimum versions of LF
1.16 and Canton Protocol versions 6. This section provides an overview of
the SCU feature, while :ref:`The Smart Contract Upgrade Model in Depth
<upgrade-model-reference>` is a concise, technical description of the feature.
```

 
Smart Contract Upgrade (SCU) is a feature for Daml
packages which enable authors to publish new versions of their templates
while maintaining compatibility with prior versions, without any
downtime for package users and existing contracts.

Package authors previously upgraded their packages by either:

-  | Providing a Daml workflow for upgrading contracts to the new version,
     and tell users of the old version to use the workflow to upgrade
     their old templates to the new versions.
   | This requires communication with all package users, splits package users
     across the two versions during the migration, and may incur
     significant network cost. This approach is described
     :ref:`here <upgrade-overview>`.

-  | Uploading the new version of their application code to their participant,
     temporarily stopping workflows relating to the old version, and manually
     upgrading every old template on the participant to the new version by

>      directly manipulating Canton’s databases. | This is error-prone and
>      requires some downtime for the participant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
     directly manipulating Canton’s databases. This method is error-prone and
     requires some downtime for the participant.
```

Now, with SCU, any contract from the old package is automatically interpreted
as the new version as soon as it is used in a new workflow that requires

> it.  This feature is well-suited for developing and rolling out of incremental
> template changes. There are guidelines to ensure upgrade compatibility

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it. This feature is well-suited for developing and rolling out incremental
template changes. There are guidelines to ensure upgrade compatibility
```

   the end;

-  The ``ensure`` predicate can be changed and it is reevaluated at interpretation;

-  A choice signature can be changed by adding ``Optional`` parameters at the end;

-  The controller of a choice can be changed;

-  The observer of a choice can be changed

-  The body of a choice can be changed;

-  A new choice can be added to a template;

-  The implementation of an interface instance can be changed;

-  A new interface instance can be added to a template.

Please consult the detailed documentation below for more information.

In this way, package authors can publish new package versions that
improve contract functionality without requiring any
error-prone migrations, without downtime, without requiring any
additional network traffic, and without any extensive communication with
downstream users.

The JSON API server is compatible with the smart contract upgrade
feature by:

-  Supporting package names for commands and queries;

-  Allowing use of an optional ``packageIdSelectionPreference`` field to
   specify a preferred package ID to use;

-  Requiring either a package id or package name to be present to disambiguate

>    the partially-qualified form of template/interface ids.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   the partially-qualified form of template/interface IDs.
```

Previously JSON API had supported partially qualified template IDs,
(i.e. simply ``<module>:<entity>``) as an interactive convenience which
fails if there is more than one package with matching template names.

> Since this format was not supported for production use and will not work
> with smart contract upgrades, it is now unavailable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since this format was not supported for production use and does not work
with SCU, it is now unavailable.
```

The Java and TypeScript codegen allow the use of package name and
package ID (if needed).

> PQS supports for this feature.  PQS now supports the highly sought after feature of using package-name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
PQS now supports the highly sought-after feature of using package-name
```

(specified in ``daml.yaml``) instead of the more cumbersome package-id. When specifying a
template/interface/choice name, simply substitute any package-id with the
package-name (eg. now ``register:DA.Register:Token``) instead of the old
``deadbeefpackageidhex:DA.Register:Token`` format. This applies to template

> filters and SQL queries (eg. via the ``active()`` function). These functions will
> always return all versions of a given identifier. Qualified name can be:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
filters and SQL queries (eg. via the ``active()`` function). These functions
always return all versions of a given identifier. A qualified name can be:
```

- fully qualified, e.g. ``<package-name>:<module-path>:<template-name>``

- partially qualified, e.g. ``<module-path>:<template-name>``

Qualified names cannot be ambiguous.

The PQS Read API now returns the package-name, package-id, and package-version
for each contract instance, making it easy for users to determine and inspect
different versions over time. To reconstruct the old experience (should you

> need to) of querying one specific version, simply use a filter predicate in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
need to) of querying one specific version, use a filter predicate in
```
